you're watching BBC News and we welcome
viewers on BBC One and BBC World News as
we expect today's coronavirus government
briefing from Downing Street to start
very shortly it's led today by the
communities and local government
secretary robert generic he's going to
be joined by Dame Louise Casey who's
spearheading the government task force
on rough sleeping during the pandemic
and also by dr. Jenny Harry's who's the
chief medical officer for England let me
just take you through some of the other
developments today while we wait for
them to come out
vulnerable people who've been asked to
shield at home in England and Wales
since the lockdown began we'll be able
to go outdoors again from tomorrow in
the UK a further 113 people who've
tested positive for coronavirus have
died taking the total number to 38,000
489 now against take you straight to
Downing Street
unless let's listen to Robert generique
good afternoon and welcome to the
Downing Street press conference I'm
joined today by dr. Jenny Harris the
deputy chief medical officer for England
and Dame Louise Casey the Prime
Minister's advisor on rough sleeping as
community secretary I'll be updating you
on our support for the most vulnerable
people in society I'll be updating you
on how we are shielding people from
coronavirus in England and the next
steps for our programme of support for
rough sleepers during the pandemic but
first I want to update you on the latest
data on the corona virus response four
million two hundred and eighty five
thousand seven hundred and thirty-eight
tests for corona virus have now been
carried out in the United Kingdom
including a hundred and fifteen thousand
seven hundred and twenty five tests
carried out yesterday two hundred and
seventy four thousand seven hundred and
sixty two people have tested positive
that's an increase of 1936 cases since
yesterday
seven thousand six hundred and thirty
nine people are currently in hospital
with coronavirus down 15% from eight
thousand nine hundred and forty five
this time last week and sadly of those
tested positive for corona virus across
all the settings thirty-eight thousand
four hundred and eighty nine have now
died that's an increase of a hundred and
thirteen fatalities since yesterday
behind each of those deaths is a morning
family and heartbroken friends and loved
ones our thoughts and prayers as ever
are with all of them at the start of
this pandemic we advised clinically
extremely vulnerable people to shield
until the 30th of June these are
individuals who are most at risk of
severe illness if they contract the
virus so protecting them has been
especially important during the pandemic
I think it's important to explain who is
shielding they are not exclusively older
people over half are under seventy over
ninety thousand of them are actually
children and they sadly will not be able
to return to school tomorrow if they're
year group is and hundreds of thousands
of those shielding are or were at work
before the pandemic many of these people
are working from home but where this is
not possible they're unable to do the
jobs that I'm sure they would wish to be
doing the one thing they all have in
common is that they've made a huge
sacrifice I'd like to echo the Prime
Minister in recognizing the resilience
of people shielding across the country
and express our admiration for their
ongoing efforts
we know that they often live with other
people so this has had a profound impact
on their lives as well and family
members have often had to sacrifice a
lot to protect the people that they love
the most and I know that a significant
number of those shielding haven't left
the house at all for nine or ten weeks
that is quite an extraordinary
restriction on their lives for those who
were advised to shield we set up the
National shielding service a huge
logistical exercise unprecedented since
the Second World War this was included
delivering over two-and-a-half million
free food boxes securing priority
supermarket delivery services ensuring
people can get medicines delivered to
their doorstep and working closely in
partnership with local government and
our fantastic NHS volunteer responders
helping people in a myriad of other ways
be that delivering shopping calling
people for a check-in and chat or
providing essential care over 350,000
people who are shielding have registered
for some form of support from the
government like food like medicine
deliveries but more than half of those
shielding have also said to us that they
want somebody to talk to over the phone
so none of us should forget the
emotional burden isolation places upon
people and the effects on mental health
and general well-being for anyone
shielding or not it's important that you
seek the help that you need and it is
available despite the restrictions so
please if this is you go to gov or the
every mind matters website for advice
and practical steps as to what you can
do and the support that's available for
your well-being during this time
I'm immensely grateful to all of those
in the NHS who have and continue to go
above and beyond to support those most
at risk during the virus we also
recognize the role of local councils and
parish councils who supported their
residents with great effect when we
announced a gradual relaxation of
restrictions in the last week I know
that many people who are shielding will
have been asking what about me
today we're setting out the next steps
for the shielded now that we've passed
the peak and the prevalence of kovat 19
in the community has reduced
significantly we believe that the risk
to those shielding is lower as it is
proportionally for the general
population as with the guidance for
shielded people more generally we want
to give people the information and the
advice that they need to make the best
decisions for them this is as always
advisory for the shielded so as a first
step I can announce today that we have
updated the shielded guidance so that
from tomorrow Monday the first of June
people will be advised that they can
take initial steps to safely spend time
outdoors this guidance is for England
only but we're working very closely with
the devolved administration's in
Scotland and Wales and Northern Ireland
who will issue their own guidance in due
course though shielding will be able to
spend outdoors with members of their own
household or if they live alone with one
person from another household this
reflects a lower risk of transmission
outdoors as well as the significantly
reduced prevalence of kovat 19 in the
community the full guidance will be
uploaded to gov dot UK later today you
must still follow social distancing
guidelines and remain at a 2 meter
students from others this will enable
those shielding to see loved ones like
children and grandchildren something
many I know are aching to do having
spent many weeks indoors
some will understandably be very
cautious and concerned about going
outdoors you should only do what you are
comfortable with in our roadmap we've
set out well the shielding guidance is
currently in place until the end of June
it may need to be extended beyond that
point our guidance to those who are
shielding will always be advisory but
it's critical that it's based on the
most up-to-date evidence and data so
today I can say that as part of each
review for the social distancing
measures for the wider population we
will also review the risks for the
clinically extremely vulnerable and
assess whether we as we currently
believe the shielding period needs to be
extended and whether it is possible for
the shielding guidance to be eased
further we will base each assessment on
clinical advice from our medical experts
and the best data available about the
prevalence of covert 19 within the
community the next review of shielding
measures will take place in the week
commencing the 15th of June and will
consider the next steps for the program
more generally beyond the 30th of June
following that review the NHS will also
write to all individuals on the
shielding patient list with information
about next steps on shielding advice and
the support that will be available to
them if the conditions become less
favorable our advice to those being
asked to shield will unfortunately need
to be tightened the government will
continue to ensure that support is
available to those who need it for as
long as possible and for as long as
people are advised
to follow the shielding guidance once
again can I thank all those shielding
for your patience and for your fortitude
everybody across the country appreciates
the unique challenges that you face and
we want to continue to do all we can to
ensure that whilst you might be at home
shielding for a bit longer you are not
alone
secondly I want to provide an update on
our work on rough sleeping and I'm
joined as I said earlier by the Prime
Minister's advisor on rough sleeping
Dame Louise Casey from the start of this
pandemic we believed we had a special
duty to protect the most vulnerable in
our society and this was especially
necessary for those people sleeping
rough on our streets working hand in
hand with charities and local councils
we've offered accommodation to over 90
percent of rough sleepers known to us at
the start in order to help them to stay
safe during the pandemic I want to thank
everyone who's been involved in this
huge national effort thousands of lives
have been protected because of your work
we've ensured councils in England have
the funding to help continue housing
rough sleepers in emergency
accommodation as part of the 3.8 billion
pounds we've provided to them in the
last two months and we will continue to
fund this essential work to get the job
done but as we enter the next phase in
our battle against coronavirus it's
right that we start to look ahead our
goal has always been that as few people
as possible return to the streets but
words and promises are not enough
because of the action that we've already
taken for the first time in my lifetime
we know who the vast majority of rough
sleepers are and where they're living
and that means that we can assess each
individual's needs and tailor the
support that we provide next
some people will need help to return to
the private rental sector but others
will need accommodation to be provided
so that they can start to rebuild their
lives
that's why 6000 new supported homes will
be made available for rough sleepers
providing safe accommodation for people
we've helped off the streets during the
pandemic the government is backing this
effort with 433 million pounds to
fast-track the safe accommodation
desperately needed to ensure as few
rough sleepers as possible return to the
streets 3300 of these new homes will
become available in the next 12 months
and 160 million pounds will be spent
this year to deliver that but rough
sleeping is as much a health issue as it
is a housing issue it's a crisis of
addiction and mental health as well so
we will provide specialist support staff
for rough sleepers in this new
accommodation to ensure that they can
continue to receive the health support
that they will need to transform their
lives and fulfill their potential these
homes will be a springboard to better
things and they will serve as a new
national asset and be a symbol of hope
and our belief that no one's path is
pre-determined I'm now going to pass
over to Damon Louise Casey Louise Thank
You Secretary of State firstly can I add
my own condolences to the families and
friends of all those who have sadly
passed away due to Co food 19 at the
outset of this awful crisis it became
clear that what we needed to do was do
all we can to make sure we were
protecting some of the most vulnerable
people in our society and we must
continue to do so the pandemic is not
over for homeless people the task was to
bring as many people in off the streets
and out of communal shelters the goal
was protect rough sleepers from the
virus give them the chance to self
isolate
and ultimately therefore to do the best
we can to save their lives
there was an absolutely extraordinary
response across the public sector
charities and businesses in response to
my call to get everyone in those efforts
have resulted in close to 15,000 people
across England now being helped I'd like
to take this opportunity alongside the
Secretary of State to thank everyone
involved it was an extraordinary and
unusual endeavor from the dedicated
outreach workers the hard-working
council staff to hotels that have opened
their doors and the faith and community
groups who have provided friendship and
food it's been an heartening example of
what we can do when we need to do it and
the best of Britain in this time of
crisis and by bringing almost everyone
in we now have another extraordinary and
unusual endeavor ahead to try and change
their lives for good beyond the
immediate response to covert 19 I stand
ready to work with all partners and des
steamed colleagues in Wales in Scotland
and in Northern Ireland so I'm really
pleased that the government is investing
in these six thousand new homes along
with the extra support and money for the
costs of their support meaning that we
can help the most vulnerable rough
sleepers in the long term this is a
really good start I am grateful to the
Secretary of State and the Prime
Minister for their support but none of
us should underestimate the challenge
ahead in order to keep everyone in there
is much more that we need to do but for
now I'd just like to thank those in
local government the Health Service the
civil servants and the countless
charities community groups who have
helped to protect this one of our most
vulnerable groups in our society during
this pandemic and those such as the
Prince's Trust business in the community
comic relief the Anglican
the Catholic churches who have pledged
wider support so now that so many are
inside I hope that we can keep it that
way what has been done here is a small
but incredible silver lining in the dark
cloud that is covered 19 thank you Thank
You Louise
I'm now going to hand over to dr. Johnny
Harris Jenni thank you can I have the
first slide please so I'm just going to
update on some of the indicators in the
progress we are having with managing the
pandemic carefully and slowly returning
to normal so the first slide that we see
here is social distancing information
it's looking at transport use from
Department of Transport data and on the
top row you can see our car light
commercial and heavy goods vehicle use
and that is all of this data is laid
back to a period of comparison either
earlier in the year or for rail it goes
back to the previous year and we can see
that our car use is gradually picking up
as we come out of some of the East some
of the lockdown measures and people are
traveling a little further important to
remind people that we should only be
traveling in cars with our own household
members it's difficult to distance so
this is a potential route of
transmission so hopefully this car use
is just for ourselves and our own
household members we can also see like
commercial vehicle use gradually picking
up as people start returning to work and
the heavy goods vehicle use has of
course been much higher through this as
all those key workers continue to help
us manage through the pandemic
delivering essential goods nevertheless
at the background of this our national
rail our transport and the bus services
have remained very very low use in
comparison to the comparator periods and
this reflects ongoing general use by key
workers only and again really important
as we start coming out of lockdown that
we're using transports carefully and
safely
try and increase use of walking and
cycling and if you're going traveling by
vehicle private car with your own
household
remains the safest next slide please so
this gives an update as the Secretary of
State has said on how many tests and
confirmed cases we've had so on the top
pink slide you can see that we have
performed four million two hundred and
eighty five thousand seven hundred and
thirty eight tests in total and in the
twenty four hours up to this morning a
hundred and fifteen thousand seven
hundred and twenty five so these will be
tests which have been done in the labs
have been sent out to individuals at
home or have been taken at the satellite
units and we have testing capacity now
right up to two hundred thousand so we
have lots of available use there as we
move into this next critical phase of
using our test and track system to try
and help support coming out of the
pandemic there is variation and you can
see that generally overall the trend
remains upwards and we will be
encouraging that as we try and squash
the disease wherever it might appear the
bottom the green chart shows the new
confirmed cases so these are all cases
which have been confirmed in a
laboratory so two hundred and seventy
four thousand seven hundred and sixty
two to date in total and just under two
thousand confirmed in the last 24 hours
that won't reflect the totality because
as many of you watching will know you
may have had symptoms and not had to
test at the time but nevertheless again
as the rolling average the blue line
shows that the number of cases overall
is coming down and that is despite
increased availability and use of
testing next slide please
this shows our data from hospital so if
we think back to the early weeks of or
the last end of March early April with
considerable concern about the use in
our hospitals the social distancing
measures that people watching have
undertaken have ensured that the number
of people entering hospital has at all
has been within the capacity of the NHS
and we can see here now that's just 545
patients were estimated admissions with
covert 19 on the 29th of May and that's
down by over 100 and 140 from the
previous week that's for England and
then if we look at data right across the
UK for the use of ventilator beds this
is now under 10% trending downwards in
every country which is really good news
and just to highlight that you can see
there that we have never really breached
the the limits of that capacity which
has been really successful next time
please so now we're looking across the
country at the number of people in
hospital with kovat 19:00 and what we
can see this week we're down about 15%
so seven thousand six hundred and
thirty-nine people down from eight
thousand nine hundred and forty-five and
although the shapes of the epidemic in
in England in the different regions and
different countries of the UK are
slightly different with a big peak you
can see on the the blue line at the
bottom right for London nevertheless
they are all continuing to trend
downwards there have been a few changes
and the way data is reported firstly in
Northern Ireland and then in Wales and
that one is particularly marked to
explain the variation in the in the
pattern but in reality all cases are
starting to fall continue to fall but it
is still a very gentle slope downwards
so it is really important that we retain
attention even when we're giving more
being given more freedoms that we
minimize the number of interactions we
have and really rigorously stick to
social distancing measures next time
polices and then finally but sadly we
always look at the number of Kovac 19
deaths confirmed so these are people who
have sadly died with a positive test
these are cases accumulated from
different sources but the number in the
last 24 hours is 113 and
whilst each of those clearly is a sad
death it is nevertheless significantly
better in in terms of those affected and
their families than we were much further
back in April where you can see the peak
again there's variation in reporting the
numbers are still coming down and you
can see the seven-day rolling average
which is a better indicator really of
the movement generally it is still going
very gently and very slowly at the end
so once again as we move forward with
the easing in our lockdown
just to encourage people to ensure that
that doesn't tick back up again and we
retain all focus on maintaining social
distancing thank you Thank You Jenny
well will now come to two questions for
members of the public in the first is
from John from Gloucester if I receive a
call from someone who says they are from
the testing trace team telling me to
self isolate how can I confirm that the
call is genuine and not from someone
acting from ulterior motives Jenny do
you want to answer how the tracking tray
system will work yes say the track and
trace system is actually a very
long-standing method if you like of
finding people and following them
through from a case of infectious
disease and public health England and
public health colleagues all across the
world do this on the routine basis they
will start from a piece of information
and at the moment the the app is not the
main source of our current track and
trace system what is happening is we
have 25,000 traces if you like available
and they will start from a piece of
information and it's highly unlikely
with all the confidentiality around the
data systems that you will be contacted
inappropriately by anyone no I recognize
that many of us will be very cautious
and quite rightly so about interactions
from external organizations but
individuals will make it very clear to
you that they are following for a
particular reason and I think it will be
very obvious in the converse
that you have with them that they are
genuine in that regard there has been a
lot of input paid to this particular
issue we're really keen obviously we
want people to follow this is for all of
our benefits and I think it will be very
evident when somebody rings you these
are professionally trained individuals
and sitting over if you like the the
telephone interviewers and email senders
are a group of senior clinical
professionals who are overseeing this
for your safety excellent thank you the
second question is from Ian from
Anglesey and Ian says the agriculture
industry and adjacent industries have
suffered greatly during the lockdown how
does it go propose to support rural
communities to transcend the coronavirus
crisis well an important question and
the government is set out from the
beginning to try to protect as many
people's livelihoods and as many
businesses as we can we won't be able to
protect every job and every business but
the range of measures that we've brought
forward as a government are
unprecedented in our history and compare
very favorably to those have been
brought forward by other governments in
other countries around the world from
the job retention scheme which is open
to all sectors including the agriculture
industry if you wished to take part in
it the sea bills the loans that are
available that bounced back loans that
are available at 24 hours notice for
businesses which tens of thousands of
smaller businesses have taken advantage
of and we're also working very closely
with the agriculture sector the food and
drink industry because they're playing
such a crucial role and you know I want
to pay tribute to everybody involved in
those industries who've kept us fed
during this crisis the supermarket's
who've ensured that food is on the
shelves and they've increased capacity
very rapidly and made services available
for the vulnerable for example
increasing the number of individuals who
can get privileged access to delivery
services as well so the Environment
Secretary is working closely with the
industry and will do whatever further
steps we need to
sure the industry is guided through this
period one particular challenge that
we're very focused on is ensuring that
the industry has the workforce that it
will need this summer to get crops in
and to to the market and onto the
shelves of the supermarket's and we've
created a number of important schemes
there to encourage people who are
looking for work to think about working
in the agriculture sector and either on
a temporary basis or indeed making a
career in a very important part of the
UK economy so Thank You Ian and thank
you to everybody in our farming
agriculture sector for the hard work
that you're doing I'm now going to turn
to questions from the media and the
first comes from Chris Mason at the BBC
good afternoon Chris hi good afternoon
it's you'd like to ask a quick question
about shielding in a moment if I may but
first a question about lockdown to you
mr. genrih can also set up two Harry's
we've heard how crucial it is in this
next stage that we stick scrupulously to
the rules that this is a very dangerous
moment that this is a sensitive moment
so I wonder how worried you are having
seen the pictures this weekend where
social distancing is difficult or
impossible well if I can answer first
and then ask Jenny's view it's really
important that all of us continue to
play our part the scientists and medical
adviser to the government have modelled
that the measures that we have already
eased and the measures that are going to
be eased tomorrow such as the opening of
car showrooms outdoor markets for
non-essential Goods and enabling us to
meet members of our own household
outside of our own house I'd rather
outdoors but those additional easements
together we'll still in all likelihood
keep the rate of affection below one so
we're reasonably confident that the
steps that we've taken and will be
taking on Monday are manageable but we
have to all continue to play our part in
that because the rate of infection
remains somewhere between north point 7
and north point 9 and the room for
manoeuvre is quite limited we'll
obviously keep this under very close
scrutiny
as we move into this next phase and as
we approach the next decision point on
the 15th of June and only take further
steps if we're confident that we can
continue to keep the rate of affection
at that manageable level below 1 thank
you and so I'll probably start with the
good news bit which is we think if
you're outdoors there's very very low
risk of transmission which is why most
of these measures in this early phase
where we're going very carefully and
slowly the scientific messages do the
outdoor measures first and having said
that the vision that you reported of
people crowding almost certainly comes
with behavioral elements of people
cramming into cars for example
potentially not sticking to the rules of
who is in the car so it should be
yourself or your household only
potentially swapping bits of cutlery or
or picnic kit on the beach and I'm being
very close together and I think you have
absolutely highlighted as did my deputy
chief medical officer colleague
yesterday this is a really really
critical time so where we are seeing
that government is easing measures the
public really really need to stick to
those messages and it is not just about
what it is possible to do it's about
what it is sensible to do and what is
sensible to do is have as few
interactions as possible as you can with
other people in all settings but there
is obviously a balance point here
between our mental health our physical
health and our social well-being and our
work environment but it's still about
limit if you can easily what you are
doing limit the number of interactions
there are plenty of opportunities to go
out get exercise be out in the Sun
without being next to other people so I
think it's really important that people
just try use these measures sensibly for
their own benefit but don't risk
transmission to other people
thanks Jo Chris I know that Secretary of
State you talk about being reasonably
confident and I wonder if some people
might be less than
reassured by that but if I may ask as I
said about about shielding as a as a
second question professor peter Openshaw
one of your advisors Ansan the anteroom
our show this morning and suggested that
some people may have been asked to
shield unnecessarily and so I wonder how
soon you might be able to say more about
those people who may be able to return
to a level of normality rather quicker
than the current guidelines suggest well
I'll ask Jenny's professional opinion on
that but as your right to say that the
shielded category is over two million
people so there's a number of underlying
conditions within that and there's a
range of risks within that we do want to
move to a more specific approach in time
and so we are our medical advisors are
taking our producing advice as to how we
can give people more specific tailored
advice to their own condition rather
than the blanket approach that we've
done so far but the advice that we have
today remains that the shielded should
stay at home but now can take advantage
of the small modest changes that we've
announced in effect from tomorrow the
ability to to meet somebody from outside
your household socially distance if
you've been living alone or the ability
to go out for for walks with your
household things which I think will be
hugely appreciated by those people Jenny
thank you and so I think just to
reiterate something the secretary State
said earlier that this is very much
advice to these individuals for them to
take measures to protect their own
health and that is the starting point I
recognize sometimes that's been
interpreted in different ways and and we
have a very wide range of response to
that with some people being very
frightened to do anything at all which
is absolutely understandable to other
people who at the end of their life and
we recognize this in writing the
original guidance would like to just
prioritize things which are important to
them and the risks of this disease are
not as important you know they want to
to do the things that are really
important to them so it is very much for
individuals but I think
one of the problems we've heard is it's
a hugely complex program and just the
clinical concepts of it was based on
sensible best first principles if you
like around respiratory disease who
would be at risk if you have if your
immune system is suppressed as we
encountered a new virus now as we're
going forward we now have much more data
on individual diseases so around
cardiovascular disease or liver disease
or renal disease and what we're looking
to do ahead is to try and understand
that risk better along with other
characteristics so for example your age
and have some sort of way of translating
that both for an individual so that they
get a sense of proportionate sense of
where their risk is and can make a
decision in a more enhanced way but also
for many of the clinical colleagues who
have been doing a fabulous job in
general practice and in some specialist
services in hospitals to try and support
their patients so that there's an
opportunity to have that discussion so I
think in the short term we are where we
are and as long as the epidemiology
continues to show a decline in cases and
a reduction in risk in the community
then we will be looking to hopefully
help all people to move from that
shielded position as quickly as possible
it is possible of course that there
could be another wave particularly as we
go into the winter and so what we're
really keen to do is ensure that we have
this new approach ready for us and
particularly also if we do get a vaccine
in the future so that we can target it
if appropriate to those people who are
most in need so I think as we go forward
a much more nuanced approach which I
think will be welcomed and we can
explain risk more but for the time being
I think we are leaving it as is it'd be
very complicated if we're hopefully
looking forward to something a little
bit more relaxed if you like over the
next couple of months great thank you
very much Chris and the next question
comes from Paul brand from ITV yeah
thank you both to the secretary of state
in to the deputy CMO we've been hearing
from quite a few people who are
shielding at the moment you still feel
they're very very
vulnerable given that the number of
cases is still higher now than when we
first went into lockdown why should they
feel any safer leaving their homes well
pass almost any two so I think for the
reasons which I've just articulated
before about our understanding of
individual risks with individual
diseases that is still a learning
process so it's can still be quite
difficult to give a very individual
approach to that risk assessment it's a
new disease but I think what we're
looking at is the whole idea if you like
behind the shielding program was because
the modeling identified a significant
number of people at risk mostly in the
elderly and in fact that is actually
still the case although we have
significant numbers shielding who are
below that age but particularly for the
elderly that if we could if you like and
the nicest possibly takes them out of
the peak as it came that would reduce
their exposure to the virus at the time
when it was at its highest circulation
and you would have seen from the graphs
earlier that's exactly where we are we
promoted the program at the start of the
peak and now our advice is that we're
getting towards the tail end of that and
we can look at the number of cases it is
a difference between the number of cases
that were confirmed at the time but the
numbers we now know from all sorts of
things to do with genomics and and
modeling where that peak started so I
think at the start of this their
expectation if you'd been out in it
would have been about one in 40 of
meeting somebody with disease it's now
about 1 in 400 to 500 and the instance
of new cases is about one in a thousand
so nothing will ever be 100% safe we
have to be really clear about that we
can never guarantee that but it's a
society make change if you like and it's
we're coming out of that peak and Paul
just to follow up on that
we're not today asking people or
advising people to stop shielding far
from it what we're saying to the people
who have been shielding for the last ten
weeks is that we think that the rate of
infection is sufficiently low now to
enable you to do some quite modest
things
like going outside for a walk with
members of your household or like if
you've been living alone meeting
somebody from another household but
those are things which will make a huge
difference to the lives of these people
as I said earlier in my opening remarks
perhaps as many as a half of the people
who've been shielding haven't left the
home in all of that time and so the
small changes that were making which
hopefully mems the public if they choose
to do them will do in a socially distant
way I think will have a huge impact on
people's mental health and well-being
while still continuing to ensure that
they're protected by being at home and
reducing the amount of face-to-face
contact that they have with people
outside their household to the absolute
minimum do you want offer follow-up
question pool yes please just a quick
went to the deputy CMO should we be
concerned at all that the number of
deaths appears to have plateaued over
the past four five or six days you know
he's progress plateauing perhaps just as
we're beginning to lift the lockdown so
to answer that one is if it's genuinely
plateauing yes we should be very
concerned and that is the reason we need
to be really really carefully not only
watching the numbers but actually
watching what we are doing so we have to
keep applying the social distancing
measures limit the number of
interactions we have and very carefully
and sensibly pick up those easements to
make our lives better but not overdo it
so limit the number of interactions
having said that of course we know from
the data that it does rely in part on
when cases are reported so we can all
see the blips at the weekend so I think
we need to be watching over a longer
period than a few days to get a sense
and that is of course why we have the
rolling average because it gives a much
more a proportionate picture if you like
of what is happening in reality but yes
it is a critical time we need to be very
careful great thank you Paul very much
indeed and the next question comes from
Jayne dthe from channel 4 Jayne yes
Thank You Secretary of State on the
easing of lockdown rules in England
tomorrow on the 10th of May the Prime
Minister addressed the nation
and said that we would gradually give
people more freedoms following a coded
alert level system and he said if the
alert level won't allow it we will
simply wait until we've got it right
we're currently at level four which
wouldn't allow for a relaxation of
social distancing so if the alert level
hasn't changed what has well thank you
very much Jane the alert level is
changing we are still at level four but
we're transitioning to level three and
that does enable us to open up very
cautiously some aspects of businesses
and our daily lives and the steps that
we're taking are quite modest they're
opening up car showrooms and four courts
predominately an outdoor activity it's
opening up those markets or the stalls
on markets which sell non-essential
Goods many of the markets themselves
will have been open already but selling
food and drink they'll now be able to
sell other products again outdoor where
the rate of transmission is lower and
then the important for our well being
measure of enabling people to meet
somebody from outside of their house
offered again outdoors socially distant
so the measures that are coming into
force on Monday are cautious modest ones
entirely consistent with the message of
the prime minister delivered when he
addressed the nation previously the
rules are there for the benefit of all
and they apply do you agree absolutely
and so I thought his his exposure of
what he felt was exactly right we
usually say exactly the same things
because we think in public health terms
and I think that's right and from my own
perspective I can assure you that on a
matter of sort of personal and
professional integrity I will always try
and follow the rules as I know he does
so yes I think we all do but the
important thing is there they are
all rules for all of us and it is really
important as we go through into this
next critical phase that we do all
follow them to the best of our ability
and actually even minimize if you like
some
the freedoms that are there to ensure
that we can very gently come out of the
pandemic and if we start to spot things
on the data which is difficult there is
opportunity then for scientific review
advise the government about what things
need to be done as we go forward thank
you very much
Jane do you want to come come back with
a follow-up to either of us or were you
happy with those responses great thank
you very much indeed
the next question is John Stevens from
The Daily Mail John Thank You Secretary
of State I'm Owen so I was following
your announcement on shielding today
where this leaves people with relatives
in care homes could they soon be allowed
to make visits or could they for example
see loved ones from a distance outside
in a garden or through a window and
briefly I wanted to ask your response to
reports the day that you gave the green
light to a 1 billion pound housing
development just weeks after a toy party
fundraising dinner where youth that
things hate Thank You John well let me
answer that the the second question
first if I may we want to build more
homes in this country have a housing
crisis we need to get the country
building that's absolutely at the heart
of the mission of this government and I
think when we come out with this
pandemic it will be even more true that
we want to see decent affordable homes
in all parts of the country and that is
what I want to do as housing sexually
with in respect to the planning
application I think you're referring to
that was judged on the merits it would
actually have allowed hundreds of
affordable homes to be provided in one
of London's most deprived boroughs which
would have been extremely valuable
there was no bias in that decision but
to ensure complete fairness and no
inference of that whatsoever
we offered to redetermination all agreed
to do that and so I think that was the
right way to move forwards Jennie did
you want to comment on the care homes
and Sue um it's a really good question
because we recognized that residents in
care homes and of course care homes vary
hugely it could be I think most people
have a picture
very elderly but we have residential
care for younger people we need to think
of all of those as well and care homes
for people with dementia who may find it
very difficult for example to follow
social distancing rules so relaxing
small measures can be very difficult to
achieve but I think at the moment the
the guidance is its advisory as we keep
saying saying it is for individuals to
choose but in a care home setting it is
very important that the level of
infection is kept very low because it is
an accumulation if you like of a number
of very very vulnerable people often and
so I think where measures are there I
know colleagues in the Department of
Health are reviewing what the visiting
should be but I think it's likely that
the advice would be very much on a
precautionary basis until we're
absolutely sure that outbreaks are have
ceased and that transmission is is very
much reduced and I mean there has been
huge progress on that real thanks to
very hard work from care workers and
residential care managers who've been
working really hard but I think it's
probably a little bit too early to be
changing those it's very important both
well primarily for the residents but I
think also for our communities as well
we don't want to find that we're getting
cases coming out of one place and moving
into another great thank you do you have
a follow up question do you know when
playgrounds in parts would be able to
reopens they can be used by children
parks already are open some parks were
closed by local councils early in the
pandemic but we thought that was wrong
it's important that people particularly
families with children and those living
in flats and cramped accommodation in
towns and cities can have you know the
open space to to go to so we asked all
councils to reopen parks and I think
other than a very small number all
councils have have done that so parks
are open playgrounds are not open in
most cases because obviously they're
it's very hard to socially distance in a
playground anyone who's got children
knows that that's pretty difficult to
control but that's something that we
will keep under review and take advice
from Jenny and her colleagues when we
think it's an appropriate time to do
that so just to add to that of course
one of the difficulties with playgrounds
is it's not your small social circle
your household or even a slightly wider
one in a public playground children will
be coming from multiple different
families all in one go they'll be
climbing up sideswiping their nose and
pushing it down the silent slide it's
not a good place to be at the moment so
I think not in the immediate future
thank you very much John the next
question is from Pippa query from The
Daily Mail Daily Mirror sorry I do
apologize Pippa you're amusing this is a
question this is a question for the
deputy CMO and new secretary of state
and we talked about quite more dissing
jizz coming in from tomorrow but of
course millions of schoolchildren
primary school children are going to
start going back to school from tomorrow
how can you reassure parents and
teachers that it's going to be safe not
just for the kids themselves but for the
wider community especially when tests
and treats doesn't yet seem to be
capable of controlling local outbreaks
well thank you peeping a very important
question for the millions of parents who
will be looking to send their children
back to school tomorrow I hope the first
thing I think to say is that 80% of
schools have been open throughout the
whole of the pandemic for the children
of key workers and for certain
vulnerable children and thousands of
teachers have been going into their
workplaces to look after those children
throughout and we're very grateful for
teachers for doing that so we do believe
it's possible to open schools safely and
we have the the track record if you like
of that as the schools have been open
for many weeks now we can also look to
our European neighbors and see how
they've managed to open schools
successfully and the lessons that have
been learned from that it's obviously
extremely important that we do this in a
safe way that's why we're doing it in
modest steps with only with certain age
groups at a time trying to ensure that
as a result of that that class
sizes a reduce or a fewer children in
each classroom and that the right advice
has provided to all the teachers and
we've been engaging the education
secretary and the Department of
Education very closely with teachers
head teachers and with the trade unions
and we'll keep on doing that to try to
ensure that everyone who works in
schools feels as comfortable as possible
and it may be that there are some
parents out there today who have not yet
made the decision to send their children
back to school but will do so in the
days ahead when they've seen other
people make that step and schools
managed to reopen safely I certainly
hope so
because it's extremely important that we
do get children back to school all of
the evidence suggests that it is
children from the most deprived the
poorer households who are losing out by
not having that crucial face-to-face
contact that you get in a school setting
and I don't want to see that continue
for any longer Jenny thank you I could
make some comments about transmission
things in children but I think they've
probably been heard in the media I think
your focus of your question was on the
the track and and trace I mean the
formal service has actually already been
up for I think since last Thursday but
actually public health seems right
across the country routinely follow
through in outbreaks and look at them I
think some of the differences here some
parents have been quite concerned about
testing so testing capacity is now very
significant it's up to 200,000 tests a
day so there's plenty of capacity there
are plenty of contact tracers and
importantly since last week the the step
for the younger children the fives under
fives for testing is also in place so I
think these are quite big changes I
think in the capacity that's available
to look into outbreaks not only that but
of course within every school the public
health England guidance highlights a
hierarchy of interventions and some of
the important ones for outbreak
situations are the fact that children
are in small groups and the advice is
not always able to be followed but
wherever possible that they stick in
that constant group so again the risks
of social in
interactions are reduced both in the
school and in the follow-through Thank
You you content Pepperwood you've a
final question for me and it's a broader
lockdown question really actually and
it's you mr. generique that despite it
being time according to the prime
minister to move on from the dominick
cummings affair if people don't fully
abide by the new rules which come in
tomorrow and we've seen examples over
the last week or so of people pointing
to that particular affair as a reason
for why they should should perhaps not
all of the rules as strictly as we'd
like them to what are you going to do
about it well the the government it's
incumbent on the government to move
cautiously it's incumbent on the public
all of us to behave responsibly and as
Jenny said to try to limit our
interactions to maintain the social
distancing rules to the best of our
ability and it's incumbent upon the
scientists and the medics who are
advising the government to monitor the
data as closely as possible and ensure
that we politicians are armed with that
as we come to the next decision point
and if the rate of transmission does
start to rise above 1 or dangerously
close to it then obviously we won't be
able to proceed with some of the other
easing that we would all wish to do so
that we can get businesses back to work
more children back to school and make
our daily lives more bearable we're
going to be doing this in a very
cautious and data-driven way in the days
and weeks ahead thanks pepper and the
last question is from Reverend Steven
Brooks who is from keep the faith
magazine Steven integrity of state today
it happens to be the very special day we
call Pentecost Sunday the time when
Christians would normally be
congregating to celebrate the birthday
of the church from over 2,000 years ago
we acknowledge that social distancing
has an important role in limiting
further transmissions of coronavirus of
the Christians assembling ourselves is
intrinsic to our faith and the
restrictions bees
congregations allowed to assemble again
and will the government give churches
clear instructions and guidance to
prevent any unnecessary breakouts of
koubek 19 similar to the guidance for
education settings which is very
detailed because what we want to do is
to make sure we do not have a breakout
that we saw in Frankfurt Germany on the
10th of May where the churches were
allowed to reassemble and then there was
a breakout in one congregation of 200
people catching the kovaydin 19 virus
thank you very much well I want to see
places of worship open as quickly as we
can I understand how important it is for
millions of people in this country and I
can understand how people of faith would
consider it strange that shops cafes
pubs restaurants many other settings
might be open in the weeks and months
ahead but not somewhere as important as
a place of worship we're working very
closely with faith leaders I've convened
a task force which has brought together
the main faith leaders and we're working
to provide exactly the kind of guidance
that you're describing some faiths have
already actually produced detailed
guidance working with Jenny's colleagues
at public health England how one might
cordon off part of a church or place of
worship how you would ensure it's
sufficiently clean you train the
volunteers who run a church how you
might just enable a small number of
people to go in at any one time
I think the first logical step is
probably to open places of worship for
individual or private prayer and that's
what we're working towards with the
faith leaders and then that will be a
springboard hopefully conditional on the
rate of affection obviously to small
weddings for example again very
important to many people and then in
time to services as you say we certainly
don't want to see what we've seen in
some other countries where large
gatherings in place of worship
particularly because of the demographic
in some faiths because of singing hymns
and so on which can lead
sort of you know exhalation can create
particular problems but I'm hopeful that
the work that we're doing with faith
leaders will bear fruit and that would
be able to see place of worship open in
the coming weeks thank you very much
indeed for your question
and that brings this afternoon's press
conference to a close I thank dr. Neha
returned in particular
Damon Ruiz Casey for joining us today
thank you